[Music]
I'm Blake layman I'm 17 years old I was
- 55 years for murder
[Music]
learners are on mckay six years old nine
seconds for ten years for robbery
I'm mark Easley I'm 18 years old and I
got 15 years for aggravated battery
I assume surprise I'm 17 years old and I
got sentenced to 65 years for murder
[Music]
this is Wabash Valley Correctional
Facility in the American state of
Indiana
this 90-acre maximum-security compound
is home to over 2,000 of the state's
most notorious criminals the convicts
are imprisoned by a 15-foot high fence
topped with razor wire a secondary
electrified fence six guard towers and
over 750 staff blocked D is unique
inside live 40 teenagers teenagers so
troublesome and violent
they've been tried and convicted as
adults they've committed everything from
armed robbery to murder serving
sentences from 2 years to 65 years
locked in their cells for 18 hours a day
these youngsters are paying a huge price
for their crimes
[Music]
boys reflecting on how a moment of
madness has destroyed their lives 9:00
a.m. to new teenage inmates arrived
children are tried as adults when
they've repeatedly reoffended in the
youth system or their crime is
considered so horrific that an adult's
maximum security prison is deemed the
only answer with over 50 teenage boys
are newly coming through their gates the
officers at Wabash know what to expect
at 17
Jacob Eldridge is back for a second
visit to the juvenile off after breaking
his parole on a previous conviction for
carrying a handgun without a license we
got a good program here but once in a
while they just don't do the program
they go out and get more trouble and
come back and the one of them here just
did that he got out and now he's back in
once it's my second time back
but it's my last time back
dance gammer the other new inmates story
is typical of the youngsters at Wabash a
few minutes of their life followed by
huge consequences six years old a
sentence for 10 years for robbery island
owed money for drugs so he his sister
and a friend decided to rob a family
friend's house
no I guess who said I didn't want around
in the first so I pretty much made
myself it's the way that planning really
didn't go how is gonna actually go
Aylin rang the doorbell when the
homeowner a 64 year old man answered
island beaten with a socket wrench
I'm just beating stood up I don't know
why I just I guess since my Adrenaline's
pumping I really wasn't thinking to just
stop push I just didn't
yeah my hands are all bloody afterwards
I couldn't see any white on my hands I
ended up being in the hospital of like
four or five days
he lost like 39 points and broke his jaw
he had contusions to the back of his
head and
[Music]
with all their possessions it's the walk
to their new home the juvenile facility
in block D
[Music]
completely separate from the adult
prisoners these 40 teenage camels eat
sleep and learn in this one unity
new guests new get there to greet them
is correctional officer Morrissey a
former military officer whose job now is
to keep the peace in the juvenile block
the new inmate will come in replace him
the cell will make sure he as I was
hygiene all his necessities he's ready
to roll
the teachers will interview in the case
with manager counselors will interview
and medical or interviewing and then
he'll be on his own with 18 years
experience officer Morrissey has seen
what it's like for new inmates scary
especially if they're they've never
experienced this type of environment
they run the gamut between fitting right
into isolating themselves in themself we
have to treat each individual as an
individual some are very aggressive and
the unit will respond the same way some
of them are very passive it just depends
on the personalities to come in
I'll say my right I also hate inside so
I was seen pretty killer so far
we'll find out I'm gonna go my family
and give you an education just go home
that's a big reason why I won't come you
know stay out of trouble I'm in here
yeah give it and get out
[Music]
prison officers aren't the only staff to
work in the unit new inmates Jacob and
Island have an induction from the
casework manager Aleta Burnett on this
first one as we're going through this I
want you to check off when I tell you to
check off what we cover on that Elise's
job is to offer the boys counseling and
guidance it'll be a good opportunity
because we have some really great
teachers here these kids are not coming
from a healthy place period so they may
feel like the whole system the whole
world has given up on them long before
they even got there and that wouldn't
surprise me you know I mean what I like
to say is these our children are throw
aways you know we need to get them back
out and be healthy they're just not
healthy this is all the rules and
regulations I really want you guys to
read through these because ignorance of
these rules and regulations there's no
excuse for conduct just like ignorance
of the law is no excuse I try to be firm
fair and consistent with all of the kids
and a lot of them they don't like to
displease me and you know that type of
thing but I don't know if I want to be
called the mama that's that's a lot of
babies to have to take care of in there
the majority of teenagers of wabash are
in for sentences of ten years or less
however being tried as adults means that
those who have committed horrific crimes
will spend much of their life in prison
a suitable set of prayers I'm 17 years
old and I got sentenced to 65 years for
murder
asus has been involved in gangs from a
young age I've been here with bats I got
stabbed in my leg
I've been shot at ain't nothing Newton
like I see this every day like from I'm
being I live this life every night so I
never got shot though surprisingly one
June evening out driving with friends in
his hometown of Elkhart he spotted a
rival and an argument began it was
knowing gangsters or something and he
stood like I don't know he said
something I got possessed or something
like something came that's not like
that's when I felt like something just
that's one full day
in a fit of anger a sous-vide one shot
yeah I seen his face - like I remember
seeing like like you know surprise face
16 year old Braxton barham's was dead I
know it like me didn't get along but
then I just I just took his life like
what the fuck what I didn't do
Asus is now spending 65 years of war
bash reflecting on that one moment okay
so that's that's what changed my life
that's what filming that's what changed
everything that's like for like when
they had my life start to like because I
don't like everything else is just gone
[Music]
the teenagers at war Bosch get one hour
of recreation in the morning and one
hour need part of the staffs philosophy
not to punish but to rehabilitate if you
have just punishment and no
rehabilitation then you're doing nothing
you're just housing people and you know
you're not helping on turnaround and
then you're gonna dump them back onto
society so basically it just shot
yourself in the foot because they're
going to go out and be the very same
they were when they come in and maybe
worse I'm mark Easley I'm 18 years old
and I got 15 years for aggravated
battery
I'm trying to make it in industry Tommy
I'm trying to give me I'm always going
to me Riverwalk a from Marquis was 16
and on probation for theft when he
committed his crime for which he was
tried as an adult
some people say it ain't because we
underage but then again we did like did
you ever held it at the same do the
crime do the time himself that's why I'm
like even me I did it so I mean I really
I'm owning up to what I'll be feeding me
they charge me like I was a man I'm
gonna step up like a man and do my time
the victim and assaults of Marcus's
mother so he decided to get revenge with
his accomplices his uncle and mother
excited I was just trying to get ready
to get home more than what I I want him
to know like to me he messed up I want
to know that like you nothing to get
away with this often to get you I ran up
on him and he's got the fistfight we got
the fight you know you feel dropped him
he feel he caught to the dope that's
what I've seen a chance
so he fit me I took up the gun I'm sorry
Wow when I saw Dee he dropped are the
first shot when I learned to court first
shot hit him in the back in his final
coordinating a paralyzed his uncle then
also fired the victim died at the scene
he ain't got what he deserved that's how
I was feeling like you've hit me if he
did he did if you took a shot he's deep
if you a desire to what I gave him him
he shouldn't hit my mama
[Music]
Marquis recently turned 18 and he's due
to move up to adult prison however he's
been allowed to stay in the juvenile
unit in order to complete his education
as long as he avoids getting ridden up
for the past six months he's essentially
stayed out of trouble this is part of
our reward program at 180 days they're
entitled to get a loaner TV and an hour
of extra record weekend there's
motivation to not get in trouble look
kid thinking like my own one rules my TV
so far the stick today be straight TV
take it back yourself doing the children
here is different from the adults
because you do tend to adopt a parental
role I don't know all their stories I
don't know all their home lives I don't
know if they think of me as a father I
think some of them do and I have to
fulfill that obligation to them as well
as do my custody position be what they
need to grow you know I don't want to
see any of them come back if they go out
onto the civilian population and I take
that responsibility very seriously
[Music]
from reward programs through to
mandatory school the staff inside the
juvenile unit of Wabash attempt to
provide a stable of life as possible for
the boys in their care multiplied by a
number plus 6 equals 46 but some of
these are teenagers trying to cope
emotionally with long sentences Indiana
law states that with good behavior an
inmate has to serve a minimum of half
their sentence
leaving hey soos Macedo Perez still
facing being in prison until he's at
least 49 years old I must come instead
of good people just try to kill each
other I'll go crazy like things for me
like no I'm saying like one folks don't
eat the same I ain't this ain't no more
but I'm not trying to deal with it like
that
I'm not trying to go nuts I'm not trying
to kill myself
I still got even though I'm here I still
got something to live for
hey soos is looking for any way to
shorten his sentence for advice he's
come to casework manager Aleta Burnett
everything goes into play as I told you
from the very beginning and conduct so
you keep your conduct you keep going to
school get everything you can so they
see you're trying to improve your life
then you can try to get some of these
things it's tough I know you can see it
in your eyes that you're upset like one
thing I can do that much I do that one
thing but don't get all down in the
dumps yeah you gonna make the best you
can of everything you know so you know
just because I can't run out here and
save you for this that doesn't mean that
I don't I'm not interested in which way
you're going okay that'll work yeah okay
all right I just can't even imagine
being that young and being in that
situation it just doesn't even compute
with my mind I just see it but it still
doesn't compute
I think he'll be okay but I mean I would
be devastated but of course I've never
put myself in that position having
worked in the unit for seven years Aleta
sees how a child's upbringing can
ultimately lead to a crime that puts
them behind bars they come from families
that you know we have generations of
this stuff going on generations of the
drugs generations of prison you know
it's it's sad you know we have several
in there right now that is a scene a
parent killed the other parent and then
we wonder you know it's almost
heartbreaking in some ways you know some
of the things these young little kids
have gone through hey Zeus is from
alcohol's in northern Indiana his father
left home when he was a total he was
sitting and I I couldn't take any more I
just I grabbed something I hit him in
the head with it and I was across the
room and I just remember that part his
mother Irene is unemployed and is
bringing up her five remaining children
in their two-bedroom apartment a five
hour drive from the prison they haven't
seen her since he was taken to war bash
he's my blood to blood brother like he's
my real brother and it hurts me a lot
because we were like me and I've been
through a lot together and stuff and
they but we still like flight I don't
know it's just hard and I don't want him
good things happened to him with his
family living just yards from where hey
Seuss's gangland shooting took place his
fear is that a rival gang will seek
revenge on his family no just
like thinking about like I can't be
there for my family like in all the
enemies I had like I hope they don't try
to hurt my family like I just think
about that it's not just on the outside
where his gang life can catch up with
him officers of court hey Sue's carrying
a letter containing gang-related
material it never surprises me whether
these guys try to get it and get away
with it's some of them who were facing
life sentences you know really what do
they have to lose they've already lost
their life or possibility life out on
the streets so now it's just up to them
as to the type of quality of life that
they want to have and a lot of them get
persuaded with the gang activities
thinking that that's going to give them
more creature comforts here inside
but eventually it catches up to you
many of the teenagers of wabash joined
gangs at a young age some of them are
not getting nurturing the way that they
need to have it and so they get into a
gang everybody wants to belong and then
they'll get them when they're very very
young you know they just want to belong
to something and a lot of them get
pulled in
how do you play
the hey sirs this is his first rise up
in prison more than ever
gang membership is hard to escape
probably one of the hardest thing to do
is get out of the game
the only way really cool get out of game
is no dead okay okay she fucked it mmm
tired of this shit
[Music]
while many of the teenagers at war Bosch
have absent fathers
many of them are fathers themselves
today is visiting day and it's
particularly special for one prisoner my
name is Anthony Sanders I'm 17 I was
here in stew 8 years for two counts of
robbery Anthony has a son and today will
be the first time he's seen him since he
arrived at war bash over a year ago I'm
looking forward to it because I ain't
seen my son in a long time
and I just wanted him to feel my
presence and I feel get the feeling of
his dad being around again talk to him
his girlfriend Nene and his two-year-old
son Anthony junior have made the
two-hour drive from Indianapolis to
visit it's all right they explained but
we're excited we ain't seen them in over
a year
so yeah we're happy I'm to him I love
him see if he's gonna meet with me back
I still liked it
enjoy your head so so I'm your daddy say
that a what's your mom
you gonna leave me say daddy what's up
you don't even remember me
[Music]
so what's up say daddy mama daddy mama
daddy my mom daddy
yes what you always talking about say
daddy he wants to have a family he wants
that so badly their children themself so
you know that's quite a responsibility
even for somebody who hasn't gone
through some of the things they have
gone through already a lot of the kids
are in relationships and of course you
know they're wanting them to their
girlfriends to marry them and all of
this I meant it is crushing for them
when they move on and it's crushing for
them especially if they have a child
with that person because that happens
quite a bit I'm not a little doesn't say
that yeah big boy it was wonderful at
first I was kind of mad and like you
know who I was he was shot but I figured
it out but all wrong he started calling
me daddy he came to he made my dad it
was fun
[Music]
made me feel real good it make me feel
like the father was out there like make
you feel like I'm important I mean let
me let me know I really got some people
that love me because when you ain't got
too many people out there at home you
know when somebody looking up to you and
make you feel important in some type of
way make me feel good
they love you leave me made my day
I'm ready to go back to my room this to
you
[Music]
it's Memorial Day a public holiday in
America the prison put on a special meal
for the boys in block D they are getting
extra food extra calories special treats
that they don't normally get throughout
the week
cos salad dressing
it will take a look burnt salad always
live with corn cool you know they love
me because the bootcamp discovers she
made a strawberry shortcake
ah me both to be what you think macho
Trejo
if they don't like the prison food
inmates can also buy treats with their
own money
blake layman has been at war bosch for
over a year and has saved up for some
ingredients to make a cake bottom I got
like honey buns like crushed up to make
like a dough now put some cookies on top
of that some peanut butter and then more
cookies and then some honey buns and
then this is some icing that I made
because it's closest thing to icing you
can get some chocolate and some peanut
butter a little bit of milk makes it uh
he's celebrating a big moments in every
child's life his 18th birthday
it's the second birthday I spent in jail
so you know it's really just another day
so that's why I made a cake so I try to
make it special you know it's my 18th
birthday a little bit more chocolate mmm
yeah I think it looks good nice birthday
best you can do really stalking him
better than that and it was Blake lemon
I'm 18 years old I was sentenced to 55
years for murder
[Applause]
as a teenager Blake was involved in
petty crime and had been expelled from
his high school I hung all my girlfriend
a lot you know we were close I was
getting high every day smoking I was I
wasn't really worried about a lot of
stuff and wasn't thinking too much about
nothing
Blake and four friends decided to break
into a house in search of some quick
money once kicked the door in to back
and got inside and there was another
door to the kitchen that was the lock to
I think someone kicked that to die
didn't know he was there until there was
actually gunshots you know that's when I
kind of freaked out you know somebody's
home I didn't know and I didn't hear
anything and just heard the gunshots and
turn around ran the other way you know
and that's what all of us did we all
didn't run or run away no so three all
three of us me Denzel and I was they
ended up in the closet but as Denzel was
running towards the closet he had got
shot in the chest and you know so he's
climbing the closet and he's bleeding
you know and as I'm climbing in the
closet I got shot in the leg so we're
all kidding cause it and you know I'm
bleeding Denzel was actually dying and
you could almost see like it's you know
a spirit leave his body you know I you
could just tell there was it was over
yes it was bad it was real bad with
their friend Denzel dead in the house
the homeowner called the police the
remaining four were arrested and taken
to the local jail I'd found out while I
was sitting there that they were
charging us for the murder you know and
at the time I kind of thought okay you
know if they don't know what happened
like you know they haven't talked
anybody you know they must think you
know we killed Potenza they must think
you know something they must have this
something switched around something
mixed up or something but there was no
mix-up under Indiana law if someone dies
during a burglary
all those breaking in can be held
accountable the prosecutor said there
was a murder committed you know the
homeowner was just and what he did which
you know it is what it is you know it
was his home that's right
but and he said someone has to be held
responsible so he felt we were gonna be
held responsible because our actions
resulted in what happened the jury found
the full guilty of murder Blake was
given 55 years behind bars time to
reflect on how it had gone so badly
wrong I'm biggest regret about that days
the whole day I mean oh I should have
just went home why was I following when
I said been leading you know why was I
you know not thinking for myself not
thinking farther ahead not thinking
about what could have what go wrong you
know so yeah I definitely regret that
day I read a lot of everything about it
[Music]
there's been an incident in the youth
bloc marquise Lee is charged with
assaulting a custody officer and is
about to go through the disciplinary
process
the previous evening lay through liquid
at another offender which also hit the
night shift custody officer I know it
may not sound serious but it is very sad
if they throw liquid or anything else or
any assault to staff if we would not
take that seriously we would be
assaulted all the time can you tell me
what happened so you threw it on a
fender Buchanan and it hit you hit the
officer if it's urine on all of this and
you throw it at somebody could contain
viruses so it's very serious tell me how
you're gonna plead I'm gonna tell you
right now you're probably not gonna stay
in here you're 18 years of age and
you're I can't have you even whether you
meant to do it or you were playing
around I can't have you doing that on a
youth unit you're 18 right yeah so how
you complete don't get high poster
please Oh guilty I did it
[Music]
if he's moved out of the juvenile block
Marcus will miss the chance to complete
his education how I'll get it if I
intentionally meant to do it Remy meant
to get it home to CL but I didn't give
him
hearing officer Sarah Chapman is
responsible for deciding the sentence
don't throw a liquid substance on staff
or and/or offenders one month phone
three months said 45 good days
I don't play when it comes to throwing
stuff you're gonna have to go sit and
say them think about what you did the
sag or segregation unit is the solitary
confinement wing for adult prisoners
it's a sad day but if anybody has heard
me talk in orientation or talk to him I
tell them how important those conducts
are and you know if you want to take a
risk then you know that's on you
[Music]
he was on this unit even though he was
18 years old he has been moved to an
adult unit where he will be treated as
an adult he is not being segregated from
the other influences like he would be
over here therefore even though he is in
a cell by himself he will still be
influenced by the voices and the
comments for those around him over here
we tend to try and shield them from that
as much as humanly possible over there
if the shield's gone they make a mistake
it doesn't surprise me that after all
they're here for mistakes they've made
it's it's just a repetition of behavior
our job here is to try and correct and
change that behavior are we successful
not always no are we successful some of
the times yes
we just be happy for our successes and
go on our business because we can't
dwell on the failures
[Music]
you
one of the goals for the boys of Wabash
Valley prison is to complete their high
school education
eighteen-year-old blake layman recently
took his final exams I've some good news
for you
yes passed your high school equivalency
congratulations thanks maybe you can
move forward from here right yeah okay
good work appreciate ya thanks for
coming down I got an education now I'm
happy too I failed the first time so you
know I'm just glad I got it done with
his schooling complete and having turn
Blake is now eligible for the next stage
of prison life the adult wings where he
could spend the next fifty three years
do you hear all these stories and stuff
like that I just know I'd see it for
myself I guess I got a lot of time to do
I'm not I could sit over here for tied
Tom like 21 or something like that I
don't review that you know I'm have to
do I don't have to go to the general
population eventually I'm gonna have to
go to the del block eventually so you
know get it out the way let's go
[Music]
Blake's mother Angie visits every two
weeks she is in less of a hurry for
Blake's moment I'm nervous about him
going to the adult side I know he's got
a couple buddies over there that are
waiting but I just know that there's a
lot of girl men over there they have
actually committed murder horrifying
crimes she's come with Blake's brother
sister and girlfriend to see him for the
first time since his 18th birthday as
well as bringing up her other two
children and holding down a job working
with people with disabilities Angie's
had to deal with the stigma attached to
being the mother of a convicted murderer
I've heard things such negative things
through the last year even us parents
should have been convicted or we should
have been charged things like that but
as a parent we can only do so much I
mean we can only leave them so far we
can only give them so much advice as
teenagers we all know we all make dolls
or choices and
do things that you wish you would have
done from her perspective the mistakes
juveniles make is not taken into account
in the u.s. system of trying children as
adults I think we haven't juvenile
justice system for a reason I think all
juveniles be charged as juveniles look
they're not adults they don't think like
adults
they don't they haven't learned like we
have these kids should have a chance to
learn from the mistake and they didn't
get that opportunity
[Music]
the Blake and other teenagers at Wabash
such as hey sirs at the beginning of
sentences longer than their life so far
hope of release is something to cling on
to I want to find out things I can do I
know there's something out there
please give me some time class or
something like the prison library could
help Haitians find an answer adult
prisoners workers clocks to help guide
fellow inmates through the complex US
legal system his murder charge combined
with his gang activity meant he was
looking at a sentence of a hundred and
thirty years so he took a guilty plea in
court in return for a reduced sentence
of 65 years so basis is your first step
trying to do anything not a piece of you
know what a PCR thwarted right I know
it's not easy for reduce your sentence
so they can reduce your sins and get
your cents over time it can it can be
anything don't bang that you retry me
like but I took a plea so it doesn't
matter I don't hold a lot of hope that
he's gonna get a shorter sentence out of
this nobody's gonna get him out of here
in a year nobody's gonna get him out of
here and - unless he overturn his whole
case it's just not gonna happen
[Music]
every prisoner whatever age whatever
crime has to come to terms with the
consequences of their actions
I regret making money even though it was
it was it was good I regret making money
the bad way I didn't realize it was
affecting people it was affecting people
that were addicted to drugs like like
stuff like that I just I guess I was too
young to realize I was 17 I was 12 13 14
[Music]
I hate myself for that
and I understand why people him I get it
I know why I feel like I hate myself too
[Music]
whenever a child's future holds it falls
to the staff to guide the inmates
through their time as best they can if
one of the young men have years and
years and years the only thing I can do
is help them endure it I guess
giving them hope is not I can't do it
I would like to see them have a better
life and I think that takes a lot out on
you when you know you can't really
provide that I'm always trying to bow
out over there it's hard on me so
I'm ready to pass that crown over to
somebody else I'm tired of being loved
and a penitentiary ain't got no money in
my books and I'm so hungry ain't got
nobody on the phone my back against the
wall and I'm all alone
man I'm locked up see this work you
changed me for the better cuz I'm tired
of talking to my people through these
letters man I'm locked up being locked
up in his room driving me crazy
and my brain is getting lazy man I'm
locked up I'm in a penitentiary ain't
got no money on my books and I'm so
hungry
see this way he'll change me for the
better cuz I'm tired of talking to my
people do these letters man I'm locked
up but the penis won't driving me crazy
my brain
[Music]